What are the four tiers of data centres construction?

Four tiers Background
Uptime Institute defined data center Tier classification levels in 1990s. 
It is the founder and trusted source for data center Tier Certification, and 
Now It already becomes global standard for third-party validation of data center critical infrastructure.



What are the Tiers?
They are consistently evaluate various data center facilities in terms of potential site infrastructure performance, or uptime. 
Data center classifications are divided into four Tiers, each Tier incorporates the requirements of the lower Tiers. 
But not mean that a Tier III data center is better than a Tier I
Different levels fit different business operations. data centre owner need to evaluate risk and cost they can take.



Tier I
Tier I data center is the basic capacity level with infrastructure to support information technology beyond an office setting. 
That are includes an area for IT system, and an uninterruptible Power Supply to filter power spikes, sags, and momentary outages, and 
cooling Units to prevent hardware shutdown for too hot. Moveover,  an engine generator to protect IT functions from extended power outages.

Against system faire from human error, but not unexpected failure or outage. 

Tier I data center features litter redundancy. Power and cooling equipment has access to only a single path, 
the facility will have to shut down completely for preventive maintenance and repairs, implying a downtime of 28 to 29 hours on a yearly basis. 
Moreover, it increases the risk of unplanned system failure and serious consequences.

Tier I data center is a good choice for small businesses with no complex requirements.
99.671% uptime percentage per year, 28.817 hours each year


Tier II
Tier II facilities cover redundant capacity components for power and cooling that provide better maintenance opportunities and safety against disruptions. 

Like a Tier I facility, the path for power and cooling is still one, unexpected shutdown of a Tier II data center will affect the system. 
but Tier II involve more redundant components which increasing reliability levels.

Like a Tier I, it have UPS, Cooling Units and engine generator. 
The redundant components also includes Energy Storage, Chillers, Pumps, Heat rejection equipment, Fuel tanks and Fuel cells. 
99.741% uptime percentage per year. 22.688 hours

A tier 1 or 2 data center may work well for a smaller company


Tier III
The key of Tier III is concurrently maintainable with redundant components. Unlike Tier I and Tier II, no need to shutdowns when equipment require maintenance or replacement.
 
It features a sophisticated infrastructure and a high redundancy level, along with multiple paths for power and cooling. 

All the components are also connected to multiple power sources. If any of these fails, others can be utilized instead, so  IT operation isn’t affected.

It situable larger companies.
99.982% uptime percentage per year.
1.5768 hours


Tier IV
Fault Tolerance Tier IV site infrastructure builds on Tier III, adding the concept of Fault Tolerance to the site infrastructure topology. 
That has several independent and physically isolated systems that act as redundant capacity components and distribution paths.  
When a piece of equipment fails, or there is an interruption in the distribution path, IT operations will not be affected. 
All of the IT equipment must have a fault-tolerant power design to be compatible. 

However, if the redundant components or distribution paths are shut down for maintenance, the environment may experience a higher risk of disruption if a failure occurs.

A Tier 4 data center features 96-hour protection from the power outage and multiple redundancies to ensure that the system 
can normally perform even if a higher number of equipment fails. 
99.995% uptime percentage per year
0.4 hours

It situable larger companies Tier 4 and 3 large multi-national organization

benifit
user, owner



When planning a data center move to an external provider or to a cloud provider, data center rankings help you understand the risks involved in using these providers

When building or redesigning your own data center, to provide a blueprint for its setup and configuration that meets your needs

When you’re hosting a critical application for a customer, they will want to know what your data center ranking is, who certified your DC, and what certification standard was used.

exceptional capability and reliability
 flexibility and reliability of Tier IV services.
  security and reliability
The confidential data can be stored in a Tier IV data center or on-premise data center while public data is stored in a less secure and more budget-friendly option.

Budget: This can be the determining factor for many businesses. In many cases, a hybrid solution of on-premise or multiple cloud data centers may be the right choice.

Security: Does the type of data being stored require the features and benefits offered by a Tier IV data center?

Flexibility and scalability: On-premise data centers are customizable but may lack the scalability needed from growing businesses. Can a cloud-based data center help alleviate this problem?
 
 


A business that invests substantially in SaaS (software as a service) needs almost uninterrupted availability for customers around the world may find it essential to secure the flexibility and reliability of Tier IV services.
The data center owner defines a need to achieve a specific Tier Level to match a business demand.

Uptime Institute Consultants review 100% of the design documents, ensuring each subsystem among electrical, mechanical, monitoring, and automation meet the fundamental concepts and there are no weak links in the chain.

